=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Zydeco::Manual::03_MethodsSignaturesTypesCoercion - Methods with signatures, type constraints, and coercion

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      has name = "Anonymous";
      
      method greet ( Person $friend ) {
        printf("Hello %s, I am %s.\n", $friend->name, $self->name);
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $alice = MyApp->new_person(name => "Alice");
  my $bob   = MyApp->new_person(name => "Bob");
  
  $alice->greet($bob);  # ==> "Hello Bob, I am Alice."

=head1 MANUAL

The main way of interacting with objects is calling their methods. Methods
are defined in the object's class, plus any roles that are consumed by the
class.

=head2 Simple Methods

You can define a method within a class or role using the C<method> keyword.

  package Farming {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Cow {
      method make_sound {
        say "moo";
      }
    }
  }
  
  MyApp->new_cow->make_sound();     # ==> "moo"

Within C<method>, the arguments passed to the method are available in an
array called C<< @_ >>.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Announcer {
      method announce {
        for my $arg ( @_ ) {
          say $arg;
        }
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $ann = MyApp->new_announcer();
  $ann->announce("Hello", "World");

If you run the above code, you'll notice before it announces "Hello", it will
announce a line like:

  MyApp::Announcer=HASH(0x55746c744c58)

This is a string representation of the object itself. The first item in the
C<< @_ >> array is the object itself.

The object itself is also available as a variable C<< $self >> within the
method.

  package Farming {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Cow {
      has noise = "moo";
      method make_sound {
        say $self->noise();
      }
    }
  }
  
  MyApp->new_cow->make_sound();     # ==> "moo"

Another special variable available within methods is C<< $class >> which
contains the object's class as a string. Because of inheritance, this might
not be the same class the method was defined in but a subclass.

=head2 Required Methods in Roles

A role can indicate that it requires classes that consume it to provide
certain methods.

  package Farming {
    use Zydeco;
    
    role Noisy {
      requires noise;
      
      method make_sound {
        say $self->noise();
      }
    }
    
    class Cow with Noisy {
      has noise = "moo";
    }
  }
  
  MyApp->new_cow->make_sound();     # ==> "moo"

If the "Cow" class didn't provide a "noise" method, then "Noisy" would
complain about that. (And yes, "Cow" does provide a "noise" method because
the "noise" attribute has an accessor method!)

=head2 Method Signatures

It is possible to provide a signature for a method; a list of what parameters
it expects.

  package Farming {
    use Zydeco;
    use List::Util qw( min );
    
    class Bucket {
      has capacity!;
      has level = 0;
      
      method empty () {
        $self->level( 0 );
        return $self;
      }
      
      method remaining_space () {
        if ($self->level >= $self->capacity) {
          return 0; # already overfull
        }
        
        return $self->capacity - $self->level;
      }
      
      method add ( $given ) {
        my $take = min($given, $self->remaining_space);
        $self->level( $self->level + $take );
        return $given - $take;
      }
    }
  }
  
  # New 10 litre bucket
  my $bucket = MyApp->new_bucket(capacity => 10);
  
  $bucket->add(6);    # Add 6 litres to bucket.
  $bucket->add(6);    # Try to add another 6 litres, but
                      # only takes 4 and returns 2.

The "empty" and "remaining" methods don't take any parameters, so their
signature is the empty signature C<< () >>. If you try to call them with
a parameter, they'll throw an error:

  $bucket->empty();                   # ok
  $bucket->empty( "some string" );    # error

An empty signature of C<< () >> is different from a method with no signature
at all. If there is no signature at all, Zydeco will do nothing to check
your method's parameters at all, and you are expected to deal with C<< @_ >>
yourself.

The C<< @_ >> array is still available in methods which have signatures
but does I<not> include C<< $self >>. For methods which have signatures,
C<< @_ >> corresponds to the parameters in the signature.

=head3 Optional Parameters

Method parameters are required by default. Missing or unknown parameters
result in an error

  $bucket->add(6);     # okay
  $bucket->add();      # throws an error because $given missing
  $bucket->add(3, 3);  # throws an error because extra parameter

Parameters can be made optional by suffixing them with a question mark.

  method add ( $given, $substance? ) {
    my $take = min($given, $self->remaining_space);
    $self->level( $self->level + $take );
    return $given - $take;
  }
  
  $bucket->add(2, "vodka");          # okay
  $bucket->add(2, "schnapps");       # okay
  $bucket->add(5, "orange juice");   # okay
  $bucket->add(1);                   # okay

Currently, required parameters must precede optional parameters, but future
releases of Zydeco may also allow required parameters at the end of the
signature.

An alternative to making a parameter optional is to provide a default for
it.

  method add ( $given, $substance = "Water" ) {
    my $take = min($given, $self->remaining_space);
    $self->level( $self->level + $take );
    return $given - $take;
  }

=head3 Slurpy Parameters

Parameters starting with C<< @ >> or C<< % >> are slurpy parameters and
eat up all the remaining values passed to the method.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Announcer {
      method announce ( $intro, @messages ) {
        say $intro;
        for my $msg ( @messages ) {
          say $msg;
        }
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $intro = "Hello world!";
  my $ann = MyApp->new_announcer();
  $ann->announce($intro, "Hello", "World");

Slurpy parameters must follow any required or optional parameters.
Slurpies are always effectively optional in that they may eat up
zero values, and cannot have a default.

=head3 Named Parameters

Especially if there are more than three or four parameters, positional
parameters can get confusing. You can forget which order they come in
and what each parameter means. Named parameters can make things more
readable.

  method schedule_meeting ( *room, *date, *start_time, *end_time? ) {
    ...;
    
    say "Scheduled meeting at ", $arg->start_time;
  }
  
  $dept->schedule_meeting(
    date        => "2020-02-22",
    start_time  => "15:00",
    end_time    => "16:30",
    room        => "A113",
  );
  
  # or...
  $dept->schedule_meeting({
    date        => "2020-02-22",
    start_time  => "15:00",
    end_time    => "16:30",
    room        => "A113",
  });

Named parameters use an asterisk instead of a dollar sign. For methods
using named parameters, a variable C<< $arg >> is available within the
method body. This provides access to all the named parameters.

  $arg->room;           # ==> "A113"
  $arg->date;           # ==> "2020-02-22"
  $arg->start_time;     # ==> "15:00"
  $arg->end_time;       # ==> "16:30"
  $arg->has_end_time;   # ==> true

The C<< $arg >> variable is an object itself which you get parameter values
from by calling methods. It can also be accessed as a hashref though.

=head3 Mixed Parameters

It is possible to mix positional and named parameters under certain
conditions.

=over

=item *

Positional arguments must appear at the beginning and/or end of the list.
They cannot be surrounded by named arguments.

=item *

Positional arguments cannot be optional and cannot have a default. They
must be required. (Named arguments can be optional and have defaults.)

=item *

No slurpies!

=back

  method print_html ( $tag, $text, *htmlver = 5, *xml?, $fh ) {
    
    warn "update your HTML" if $arg->htmlver < 5;
    
    if (length $text) {
      print $fh "<tag>$text</tag>";
    }
    elsif ($arg->xml) {
      print $fh "<tag />";
    }
    else {
      print $fh "<tag></tag>";
    }
  }
  
  $obj->print_html('h1', 'Hello World', { xml => true }, \*STDOUT);
  $obj->print_html('h1', 'Hello World',   xml => true  , \*STDOUT);
  $obj->print_html('h1', 'Hello World',                  \*STDOUT);

=head2 Types

Type constraints may be used to ensure that values are of the correct type.

  class Calculator {
    method add ( Num $x, $Num $y ) {
      return $x + $y;
    }
  }

You may use any type from L<Types::Standard>, L<Types::Common::String>,
or L<Types::Common::Numeric>, plus any role type or class type that you
define via Zydeco.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      ...;
    }
    
    class Company {
      has employees = [];
      method hire ( Person $employee ) {
        push @{ $self->employees }, $employee;
      }
    }
  }

As type constraints are designed to operate on scalars rather than arrays
or hashes, if you need to type check a slurpy parameter, pretend it's a
reference.

  method hire ( ArrayRef[Person] @new_employees ) {
    push @{ $self->employees }, @new_employees;
  }

=head3 Choosing a Type Name for Your Class

Zydeco usually names types with names that closely correspond to your
classes and roles.

  class Foo;            # type name: Foo
  role Bar;             # type name: Bar
  class Foo::Bar;       # type name: Foo_Bar

You can choose a different type name if you prefer:

  class Person {
    type_name Hooman;
  }

If you choose a custom type name, remember to use that, and not the class
name, in places where Zydeco expects a type.

  method hire ( Hooman $employee ) {
    ...;
  }

=head3 Using Type Constraints for Attributes

As well as in signatures, type constraints can be used in attribute
definitions.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      has name      ( type => Str );
      has children  ( type => 'ArrayRef[Person]' );
    }
  }

Types can optionally be quoted; in the above example this is done because
at the point where the attribute definitions are being compiled, the
B<Person> type hasn't been defined yet, so cannot be used as a bareword.
You can pre-declare it if you like.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco declare => ['Person'];
    
    class Person {
      has name      ( type => Str );
      has children  ( type => ArrayRef[Person] );
    }
  }

=head3 Defining Custom Types in a Class

Sometimes you need additional type constraints. The easiest way to do that
is to define a type library using L<Type::Library> and import it.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    use My::Custom::Types -all;
    
    ...;
  }

These types will now be available to all of MyApp's classes and roles.

It is possible to also define a custom type within a single class or role.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco declare => ['Person'];
    
    begin {
      my $registry = Type::Registry->for_class($package);
      $registry->add_type( ArrayRef[Person] => 'People' );
    }
    
    class Person {
      has name      ( type => Str );
      has children  ( type => 'People' );
    }
  }

=head2 Coercions

Type coercions (also called type conversion, type casting, or type juggling)
allows you to automatically convert a value of one type into another.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      has name = "Anonymous";
      
      method greet ( Person $friend ) {
        printf("Hello %s, I am %s.\n", $friend->name, $self->name);
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $alice = MyApp->new_person(name => "Alice");
  my $bob   = MyApp->new_person(name => "Bob");
  
  $alice->greet($bob);  # ==> "Hello Bob, I am Alice."

The "greet" method expects to be passed a Person object, but what if we
wanted to allow it to also accept a string, the person's name?

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      has name = "Anonymous";
      
      coerce from Str via from_string {
        $class->new(name => $_);
      }
      
      method greet ( Person $friend ) {
        printf("Hello %s, I am %s.\n", $friend->name, $self->name);
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $alice = MyApp->new_person(name => "Alice");
  
  $alice->greet("Bob");  # ==> "Hello Bob, I am Alice."

Now the Person class has a "from_string" method, and anywhere the Person
type constraint is used, a string will now be accepted and "upgraded" to
a Person object via that method.

An alternative technique would be to use a signature that accepted both
strings and Person objects.

  package MyApp {
    use Zydeco;
    
    class Person {
      has name = "Anonymous";
      
      method greet ( Person|Str $friend ) {
        my $friend_name = is_Str($friend) ? $friend : $friend->name;
        printf("Hello %s, I am %s.\n", $friend_name, $self->name);
      }
    }
  }
  
  my $alice = MyApp->new_person(name => "Alice");
  
  $alice->greet("Bob");  # ==> "Hello Bob, I am Alice."

=head2 Optimization

Adding C<< :optimize >> to a method instructs Zydeco to perform additional
optimizations at compile-time to improve its run-time speed.

  method foobar :optimize ( $foo, $bar ) {
    ...;
  }

In optimized methods you cannot close over variables.

=head1 KEYWORDS

In this chapter, we looked at the following keywords:

=over

=item C<< method >>

=item C<< requires >>

=item C<< type_name >>

=item C<< coerce >>

=back

=head1 TODO

This page should probably detail C<overload>.

=head1 NEXT STEPS

This chapter covered some very big topics; methods, signatures, and type
constraints and coercions. Signatures and types will be used quite a lot
in the next three chapters as well.

=over

=item *

L<Zydeco::Manual::04_Factories> - Factories to help your objects make other objects

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Toby Inkster E<lt>tobyink@cpan.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2020 by Toby Inkster.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=head1 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES

THIS PACKAGE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

